---
layout: archive
title: "Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
---

<h2 style="text-align: center;">Work in Progress</h2>
   
**In the Shadow of Brothers: Sibling Spillovers and Educational Outcomes of Migrant Girls**

<div style="text-align: justify; text-justify: inter-word;">
Academic inequality between migrants and natives is often attributed to family dynamics that are difficult to observe. Siblings provide a way to study them: I estimate the effect of having a high-achieving older sibling on the educational outcomes of children in migrant and native families. Exploiting exogenous variation in sibling achievement generated by Sweden’s school-entry cutoffs in a regression discontinuity design, I show that having a high-achieving brother has a negative effect on second-generation migrant girls, whereas having a high-achieving sister has a small positive effect. No such heterogeneity by sibling gender appears for second-generation migrant boys or native children. I propose a simple theory highlighting gender-biased parental preferences. Consistent with this mechanism, the effects are more pronounced in migrant families with traditional backgrounds and are reflected in mothers’ labor supply responses when sons, rather than daughters, are high-achievers.
</div>


*Presented at SOLE/EALE/AASLE 6th World Labor Conference, the Economics Faculty Research Seminar at University of Innsbruck, EALE annual Conference 2024, IZA Summer School 2024, the 14th International Workshop of Education Economics (IWAEE) 2024, CESifo Labor Conference 2024, UCSD phd seminar in spring 2024, CESifo/CES Workshop on the Economics of Children 2023, 1st Workshop on Education Economics and Policy (WEEP) 2023, The 61st Annual ESPE Meeting 2023.*  


**Life After Divorce: Effects of Joint Custody on Parents and Children**

<small> with [Stella Canessa](https://sites.google.com/view/stellacanessa/home), [Gordon B. Dahl](https://econweb.ucsd.edu/~gdahl/), [Costas Meghir](https://sites.google.com/yale.edu/costasmeghir/home), [Susan Niknami](https://sites.google.com/view/niknamisusan), [Mårten Palme](https://www.su.se/english/profiles/palme-1.181789), [Helmut Rainer](https://sites.google.com/ifo.de/hrainer/home), [Olof Rosenqvist](https://www.ifau.se/en/About-IFAU/Personnel/Researchers-Research-Officers/Olof-Rosenqvist/), [Pengpeng Xiao](https://www.pengpengxiao.com/) <small>

<div style="text-align: justify; text-justify: inter-word;">
Custody arrangements are crucial in determining how frequently and in what way children interact with each parent after a divorce, because these potentially translate to investments in children by both parents. This paper explores the causal effects of joint versus sole custody on children's and parents' outcomes. We merge hand-collected data on more than 100,000 custody cases with several registries from Statistics Sweden to create a comprehensive administrative data set containing various child and parental outcomes measures. To identify the casual effects of joint versus sole custody, we leverage the random assignment of custody cases to judges, along with systematic differences in judges' preferences for joint versus sole custody. We demonstrate that pre-determined characteristics of parents and children are uncorrelated with the preferences of the judge handling their case, whereas judges' preferences are highly predictive of the custody ruling in individual cases. Preliminary findings from the paper indicate that shared custody (i) has significant positive effects on children's educational outcomes, (ii) increases fathers' labor market attachment and earnings, and (iii) shows no significant impact on mothers' labor market outcomes.
</div>
  
*Presented in the CESifo Labor Conference 2025. Funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG). This project included a large data collection and digitization of records from the Swedish court system. The script to generate a data structure from text documents is publicly available [here](https://github.com/scanessa/custodyproject).*

 **Linguistic Distance and the Gender Gap in Education**

<div style="text-align: justify; text-justify: inter-word;">
This paper examines how linguistic distance between host and origin languages influences the gender gap in migrant children's education. Linguistic distance highlights an overlooked factor: girls’ advantage in early language learning. Using cross-country PISA data and an epidemiological approach, I show that the gender gap in reading and math test scores widens in favor of girls among fifteen-year-old migrants from countries with less similar languages to the host country. Linguistic distance does not have an impact on the gender gap for second-generation migrants born in the host country. In contrast, cultural proximity in gender norms poses a significant disadvantage for second-generation migrant girls in terms of both reading and math scores. While distances in linguistic and cultural gender norms both reflect cultural proximity, they affect the academic gender gap of first- and second-generation migrant children differently.
</div>
